Title: Looking at the last months
Summary: MiniDebConf, Kit Gráfica Livre, LGM 2014 and more
Date: 2014-09-04 15:08
Author: manufactura
Category: Post
Slug: looking-at-the-last-months
Lang: en

While we're figuring out our routines to come back to writing after an
August of holidays, here's a quick write up our ventures since February
this year.

### MiniDebConf Barcelona

In March, Ana participated in the [MiniDeb Conf
Barcelona](http://bcn2014.mini.debconf.org/). She presented the [Libre
Graphics magazine](http://libregraphicsmag.com) in a talk about libre
methodologies in design and in the production of physical objects. The
slides of the presentation are
[here](https://gitorious.org/libregraphicsmag/documentation/source/a26c329c3c80ff7d3b28276dd643d15336a16f79:presentations/minidebconf2014/slides)
and there is also a
[video](http://meetings-archive.debian.net/pub/debian-meetings/2014/mini-debconf-barcelona/Making_pages_turn_The_physical_side_of_FLOSS_design_by_Ana_Isabel_Carvalho.webm)
of the full presentation.

### Kit Gráfica Livre

In April, we assembled and made public the first instance of the [**Kit
Gráfica Livre**](http://kitgrafica.manufacturaindependente.org/) (Libre
Graphics Kit). It is a portable safebox with a USB cable, containing a
read-only SD card reader.  
Placed in the bar of the Porto Fine Arts Faculty, it makes available a
set of libre software for graphics and audio production. Besides
software, people can find a collection of libre assets, such as
typefaces, publications, typography books and a selection of F/LOSS
manuals. All for free copying — while at the bar, anyone can pick up the
box and use the USB cable to copy everything to their computer.

![](http://www.kitgrafica.manufacturaindependente.org/media/img/kitgraficalivre-white.png)

Our plan is to bring free culture and free software closer to students
with this kit. There is an ample amount of open and free materials,
tools and assets, but they are very often disregarded in the teaching of
arts and design. We would like to see more kits in other arts&design
schools, so get in touch if you would like to run one in your school.
There's also a plan for regular updates with new assets and tools.

We'll keep posting about this mutating kit. In the meantime, there is a
mini site for this project
[here](http://kitgrafica.manufacturaindependente.org).

### Libre Graphics Meeting 2014

[![LGM 2014: Creative
Suites](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/13699945683_94718bfe6a_k-1024x682.jpg)](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/13699945683_94718bfe6a_k.jpg)

In May we were at the [Libre Graphics Meeting
2014](http://libregraphicsmeeting.org/2014) in Leipzig. Our talk, titled
"Dear designer, have these cool tools", was a about our desire to make
distro that could introduce designers to libre tools and mindset. And
help designers already using libre tools to persevere in this still arid
land. We showed the Kit Gráfica Livre as one of the steps building up to
this ambitious plan.

The slides were done using <http://scri.ch>, a simple (and imensly fun)
collaborative sketch tool that Raphäel Bastide announced at this LGM.
You can find the set
[here](http://libregraphicsmag.com/2014/04/slides-from-dear-designer-have-these-cool-tools/),
and watch the
[video](http://download.gimp.org/pub/gimp/lgm/2014/day_4/063_Dear_designer__have_these_cool_tools/063_Dear_designer__have_these_cool_tools.ogv)
courtesy of the Gimp team.

### Open Legislative Data Conference II

The Open Legislative Data Conference in Paris II took place in the end
of May. Having been involved in the early stages of the Fabrique de la
Loi, a visualization tool for the French law, we attend to present our
latest open data project, Data Central. You can read more about in this
[OKFN Labs post](http://okfnlabs.org/blog/2014/08/19/datacentral.html).
Videos and slides from the presentations are available
[here](http://blog.lafabriquedelaloi.fr/conference/oldp-conference-ii-time-has-come-for-law-tracking-follow-up/).

### Interview on the practice of "open design"

In June, we gave an
[interview](http://designadvancedresources.org/54-roughnough-e-manufactura-independente/)
in the portuguese podcast [DAR em Conversa
Aberta](http://designadvancedresources.org/category/dar-em-conversa-aberta/).  
[Design Advanced Resources](http://designadvancedresources.org/) (DAR)
is an association that is dedicated to the promotion of Open Design,
based in Caldas da Rainha. From what we got it was the first time they
talked to practioners about the field of graphic design. We talked about
our work with the Libre Graphics magazine, the Kit Gráfica Livre, the
From Stone to Spaceship workshop and why free software is about much
more than saving money.

