Title: OFLB: Sketches and blueprints
Date: 2011-07-07 16:44
Author: manufactura
Category: Hidden
Slug: oflb-sketches-and-blueprints

<!--:en-->[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/IMAG0163-1024x613.jpg "IMAG0163")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/IMAG0163.jpg)

We got our hands full with the first phase of the work for releasing
Open Font Library 0.3. We kept sketching and making notes during an
online VOIP meeting with Dave and [Fabricatorz](http://fabricatorz.com/)
Jon Phillips and Christopher Adams (above, our frantic loose notes as we
tried to pin down all points and new ideas).

The redesign process usually ends up involving smaller, but not less
important, design details. We found that most discussions relating to
technical details ended up being closely related to design issues. For
instance, at one point we were discussing internal details about the
implementation of OFLB translation, so that the website can be easily
translatable into other languages. It follows that, for the feature to
work properly, it needs a clear and usable interface -- that's where
design comes in. Good design can highlight and improve a good technical
feature; at the same time, having an awkward interface can jeopardise
all the effort in putting a technical implementation together.

Fabricatorz pointed out how useful having mockups can be for a
developer, as having even a blurry idea for an interface can make the
development process smoother, by making one realise details that weren't
clear, and even showing new possible directions for new features. As
we're typing out blueprints and publishing then on the [OFLB
launchpad](https://launchpad.net/openfontlibrary), we also did a very
rough first draft of the icons for marking the various flags a font can
have. (Well, the very first draft is in our notes above. So technically
this is a very rough second draft.) We're still trying out ideas and
shapes, and once we're happy with a visual style we will adapt them to a
design that can work in very small sizes.

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/flag-icons1.png "flag-icons")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/flag-icons1.png)<!--:--><!--:pt-->[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/IMAG0163-1024x613.jpg "IMAG0163")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/IMAG0163.jpg)

Esta semana temos estado (e vamos estar) ocupados com a primeira fase do
trabalho de preparação da versão 0.3 da Open Font Library. Fizemos
esboços e tirámos notas durante uma reunião online com o Dave e os
[Fabricatorz](http://fabricatorz.com/) (Jon Phillips e Christopher
Adams). Acima, as notas soltas que fomos fazendo à medida que apareciam
novas ideias e se colocavam novas questões.

O processo de redesign acaba por envolver pormenores muito pequenos e
específicos, mas não por isso menos importantes. Apercebemo-nos que a
maior parte das discussões acerca de pormenores técnicos de
implementação acabam por estar muito relacionadas com questões de
design. Por exemplo, num momento estávamos a discutir pormenores
internos acerca da estrutura de tradução da OFLB, para que o website
possa ser facilmente traduzido para outras línguas. Para que uma nova
funcionalidade seja efectivamente funcional, ela vai precisar de um
interface claro e acessível -- é aí que entra o design. Um bom arranjo
gráfico pode amplificar uma determinada funcionalidade; ao mesmo tempo,
um interface trapalhão pode pôr em causa todo o esforço investido na
concepção de uma nova funcionalidade técnica.

Os Fabricatorz apontaram a utilidade das maquetes que temos feito, já
que mesmo uma ideia pouco esboçada de interface pode tornar o processo
de desenvolvimento técnico muito mais claro, ao evidenciar pormenores
que não estavam visíveis, e até mesmo mostrando novas direcções para
novas funcionalidades. À medida que vamos colocando novos *blueprints*
no [Launchpad da OFLB](https://launchpad.net/openfontlibrary), também
fizemos um primeiro esboço dos ícones para os vários estados que uma
fonte pode ter. Ainda estamos a experimentar com cores e formas; no
momento em que estivermos satisfeitos com um estilo visual, vamos
adaptar os ícones para que possam funcionar em tamanhos pequenos.

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/flag-icons1.png "flag-icons")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/flag-icons1.png)<!--:-->

