Title: Out now: Libre Graphics magazine issue 2.2, Gendering F/LOSS
Date: 2014-02-28 17:35
Author: manufactura
Category: Blogpost
Tags: libregraphicsmag
Slug: out-now-libre-graphics-magazine-issue-2-2-gendering-floss

<!--:en-->![issue2.2](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/issue2.2.jpg)

We're very pleased to announce the release of issue 2.2 of Libre
Graphics magazine. This issue, built around the theme "Gendering
F/LOSS," engages with discussions around representation and gendered
work in Free/Libre Open Source Software and Free Culture.

We invite you to buy the print edition of the issue or [download the
PDF](http://libregraphicsmag.com/ "Issues"). We invite both potential
readers and submittors to download, view, write, pull, branch and
otherwise engage.

Why Gendering F/LOSS?
---------------------

In the world of F/LOSS, and in the larger world of technology, debate
rages over the under-representation of women and the frat house attitude
occasionally adopted by developers. The conventional family lives of
female tech executives are held up as positive examples of progress in
the battle for gender equity.

Conversely, pop-cultural representations of male developers are
evolving, from socially awkward, pocket-protectored nerds to
cosmopolitan geek chic. Both images mask the diversity of styles and
gender presentations found in the world of F/LOSS and the larger tech
ecology.

Those images also mask important discussions about bigger issues: is it
okay to construct such a strict dichotomy between "man" and "woman" as
concepts; how much is our work still divided along traditional gender
lines; is it actually enough to get more women involved in F/LOSS
generally, or do we need to push for specific kinds of involvement; do
we stop at women, or do we push for a more inclusive understanding of
representation?

This issue looks at some of the thornier aspects of gender in F/LOSS art
and design. In discussing gendered work, the push for greater and
greater inclusion in our communities, and representations of gender in
our artistic practices, among others, we hope to add and amplify voices
in the discussion.

Gendering F/LOSS is the second issue in volume two of Libre Graphics
magazine (ISSN 1925-1416). Libre Graphics magazine is a print
publication devoted to showcasing and promoting work created with
Free/Libre Open Source Software. We accept work about or including
artistic practices which integrate Free, Libre and Open software,
standards, culture, methods and licenses.

To find out more about the purpose of Libre Graphics magazine, [read our
manifesto](http://libregraphicsmag.com/manifesto/ "Manifesto").
<!--:--><!--:pt-->![issue2.2](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/issue2.2.jpg)

É com imenso prazer que anunciamos o lançamento do número 2.2 da revista
Libre Graphics. Este número, à volta do tema Género e Software Livre,
envolve-se nas discussões sobre representação de género e no vasto
trabalho que reflete sobre este tópico no mundo da Cultura Livre.

Convidamos-te a adquirir a edição impressa ou fazer [download da versão
completa](http://libregraphicsmag.com "Libre Graphics magazine 2.2: Gendering F/LOSS")
em http://libregraphicsmag.com. Convidamos também potenciais leitores e
contribuidores da revista a fazer download, explorar, ler, remisturar e
outras ações de participação possíveis.

Porquê “Género e Software Livre”?
---------------------------------

No mundo do Software Livre e Open Source, e, mais abrangentemente, no
mundo da tecnologia, o debate acerca da sub-representação feminina e a
prevalência de um ambiente dominado por uma visão masculina sucedem-se.

A vida familiar convencional de mulheres que trabalham na área da
tecnlogia é exaltada como um exemplo positivo nesta batalha pela
igualdade. Ao mesmo tempo, a figura do programador homem, na cultura
popular, vai-se alterando, fugindo da imagem do “nerd” solitário e
socialmente inepto para um dandy urbano, “geek chique”. Ambas as
representações escondem uma realidade complexa de estilos e
personalidades que caracterizam o mundo do Software Livre e o
ecossistema da tecnologia.

Estas imagens são responsáveis por reduzir uma discussão que se estende
a questões fundamentais: é possível estabelecer uma relação dicotómica
tão forte entre os conceitos de "homem" e "mulher"? Quanto do nosso
trabalho se encontra organizado de acordo com esta divisão tradicional
de género? É suficiente conseguir trazer mais mulheres para o campo do
Software Livre e Open Source ou precisamos de focar este envolvimento em
torno de funções mais específicas? É suficiente tentar o envolvimento de
mais mulheres nesta área ou precisamos de apontar a outras tantas
minorias sub-representadas?

Este número aborda alguns dos aspetos mais conflituosos no que diz
respeito ao género no design e na arte, dentro do Software e Cultura
Livres. Ao discutir perspetivas críticas sobre género, tentamos
sensibilizar e abrir as portas para uma comunidade mais inclusiva e
consciente das representações presentes na sua prática artística, entre
outras. Tentamos, assim, acrescentar a nossa voz à discussão e ampliar o
discurso de outras vozes.

Género e Software Livre é o segundo número do segundo ano da Libre
Graphics magazine (ISSN 1925-1416). A revista Libre Graphics é uma
publicação impressa dedicada à divulgação e promoção de trabalho criado
com Software Livre e Open Source. Procuramos trabalhos sobre ou que
façam recurso a práticas artísticas que integrem Software Livre e Open
Source, standards, cultura, métodos e licenças.

Para mais informação sobre a revista Libre Graphics, lê o nosso
[manifesto](http://libregraphicsmag.com/manifesto/ "Manifesto").<!--:-->

