Title: OFLB: Showing the fonts in action
Date: 2011-07-05 17:02
Author: manufactura
Category: Hidden
Slug: showing-the-fonts-in-action

<!--:en-->We have just started working on [Open Font
Library](http://openfontlibrary.org) with the task of rethinking the
site's look and structure, as well as other improvements that we'll
share later. Taking up a challenge put forward by Dave Crossland, we'll
also try and blog our work process.

As a result of our first impressions of the current website and other
existing type websites, we came up with a few ideas to work on.

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/univers-else-300x159.png "univers-else")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/univers-else.png)

One of the things that we noted down was the big difference between
printed type catalogues and online catalogues. The first taste of type
for the web is still not much explored at the blooming field of
typography web services.

So that's how we came to the formulation of our first idea for the Open
Font Library font list: How can you show the available fonts and
possible use cases — the kind of font presentation you always find in
printed specimens?

In order to try it out this approach, we came up with this:
<http://manufacturaindependente.com/oflb/font-list>

We get the current font list layout — simple and clean — but with an
added font use example on mouse hover. Our idea would be to create a set
of examples, each of them composed by background color, background
image, text color and text shadow; then, apply them randomly on the font
list. This way, there's no immediate need for human input —
auto-specimens!

Before getting to this result, we experimented the same thing but with
an alternate text on hover (as you can see in the image that illustrates
the post). As we went on styling the text, we understood that this would
be a much harder feature to implement and maintain. If we ought to go
this way, we would probably need to have an editor who would manually
fine-tune the samples.  
Even though what we came up with is much simpler, it is already a good
hint for users of a typeface's capabilities.<!--:--><!--:pt-->Começámos
esta semana a trabalhar na [Open Font
Library](http://openfontlibrary.org) com o objectivo de repensar o
aspecto e a estrutura do site. E, aceitando o desafio proposto por Dave
Crossland, vamos escrevendo aqui, à medida que avançamos no trabalho.

O resultado da análise deste e de outros sites de tipografia deu-nos as
primeiras ideias para arrancar.

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/univers-else-300x159.png "univers-else")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/univers-else.png)

Uma das coisas que notámos foi a enorme diferença na forma como as
fontes são apresentadas entre catálogos impressos e repositórios online.
Apesar de finalmente se puder usar tipografia na web com alguma
liberdade — graças ao CSS3 e à maravilhosa propriedade @font-face — esta
ainda não é uma vertente muito explorada pelos serviços de fontes
online. Os especímenes continuam a existir mas são feitos com imagens, e
estão normalmente reservados a fontes recentes ou em destaque.

E foi assim que formulámos a primeira ideia para a lista de fontes da
Open Font Library:  
Como podemos mostrar as fontes em ação — tal como acontece num
espécimen impresso?

Concretizámos esta ideia numa maquete que pode ser vista aqui:
<http://manufacturaindependente.com/oflb/font-list>  
Mantivemos a mesma composição da página — simples e limpa — e
acrescentámos-lhe um exemplo de uso quando se passa o cursor por cima de
uma fonte.  
A nossa ideia consiste então em criar um conjunto de exemplos, cada um
deles composto por um fundo, cor do texto e sombra, e atribuí-los, à
sorte, às fontes da lista. Desta forma é possível ter especímens
auto-gerados para todas as fontes, em vez de ter de criar cada um deles
à mão!

Antes de chegar aqui ainda experimentamos ter, além do aspecto, um texto
alternativo no hover (como o da imagem que ilustra o post). À medida que
íamos formatando o texto, percebemos que esta seria uma funcionalidade
bem mais difícil de implementar e manter. Se decidíssemos avançar por
aqui iríamos certamente precisar de um editor que ajustasse manualmente
cada um dos exemplos, consoante a fonte e a amostra de texto.  
No nosso [exemplo](http://manufacturaindependente.com/oflb/font-list),
apesar de mais simples, conseguimos dar uma ideia das potencialidades de
uma fonte.<!--:-->

