Title: The LGM week in Montréal
Date: 2011-05-23 23:25
Author: ana
Category: Blogpost
Slug: the-lgm-week-in-montr%c3%a9al

<!--:en-->From the 6th to the 15th of May we were at Montréal for the
[Libre Graphics Meeting
2011](http://www.libregraphicsmeeting.org/2011/).  
These were intense days and we ended up not managing to post while
still there.  
As a result we got home with a big list of stuff we had done in our
heads and just decided to write it down quickly to share.

![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/IMG_4109.png "LGM 2011")

Here is the list of some of the things we did while at Montréal:

<ul>
<li>
Discovered a very simple and powerful stop motion animation software
called [Toonloop](http://toonloop.com/). The main developer, Alessandre
Cressy, hosted a pre-LGM workshop and an LGM talk on this wonderful
tool.

</li>
<li>
Rented Bixis (Montréal rental bikes): best way to get to know the city.
Had a nightmarish experience to find a parking spot after 00am.

</li>
<li>
Debated on the theme of [Tools](http://libregraphicsmag.com/tools/) with
Eric Schrijver, Peter Linell at StudioXX. This was also the motto for a
poster exhibition curated by ginger coons for the LGM week.

</li>
<li>
Learned to sew with [Susan Spencer](http://www.sew-brilliant.org/). And
started an automated tool to generate patterns using a graphical user
interface.

</li>
<li>
Assisted a full afternoon of drawing [Famous
People](http://www.openclipart.org/packages-famous-people) for the Open
Clip Art Library.

</li>
<li>
Got blown out once again by Tom Lechner's presentation on
[Laidout](http://www.laidout.org/).

</li>
<li>
Actively participated in
[Scribus](http://www.scribus.net/canvas/Scribus) and
[Inskcape](http://inkscape.org/) BOF's. Exciting times ahead.

</li>
<li>
Presented one year of Libre Graphics Magazine; offered copies of issue
1.1; sold copies of issue 1.2 and released PropCourier on Open Font
Library.

</li>
<li>
Got interviewed for the Creative Commons blog about the Libre Graphics
Magazine. The set was the living room of our rented apartment: me,
ginger and Ricardo seated in a luxurious white leather couch.

</li>
<li>
Met Matt Lee, from the [Free Software Foundation](http://www.fsf.org/);
Christopher Allan Webber, from Blender and Creative Commons, who gave
the awesomest talk about Python scripting in Blender!

</li>
<li>
Ate delicious minestrone cooked by Femke; portobello burgers cooked by
John Haltiwanger; vegetarian pataniscas with naughty tomato rice and
spinach by me and Ricardo; and delicious vegan pie with mushrooms and
soy gravy cooked by ginger.

</li>
<li>
Broke a coffe machine, a toaster and the back door to our apartment (all
fixed in time).

</li>
<li>
Fixed the back door with the wise help of [Martin
Owens](http://doctormo.org/).

</li>
<li>
Had the chance to meet Michael Mulley, the person behind the
[openparliament.ca](http://openparliament.ca/) website.

</li>
<li>
Presented [Shoebot](http://shoebot.net/) at the Montréal Python User
Group meeting.

</li>
<li>
Biked, bused, metroed and walked all over the city of Montréal.

</li>
<li>
Visited John Lovell's printing house.

</li>
<li>
Planned a year ahead of Libre Graphics Magazine.

</li>
<li>
Stole a selection of five hilarious city postcards from ginger to mail
home before leaving to Porto.

</li>
<li>
Bought maple syrup planning for a delicious pancake afternoon with
friends in Porto.

</li>
<li>
Got some serious advice about work and business attitude from Pierre
Marchand.

</li>
<li>
Tried out Pierre Marchand's [Fonzie](http://www.oep-h.com/fonzie/). A
program to generate typefaces from drawings. It works!

</li>
<li>
Rode a school bus with a bunch of LGM geeks.

</li>
<li>
Attended the book launch [*Paying for
it*](http://www.drawnandquarterly.com/shopCatalogLong.php?st=art&art=a3dff7dd51fc01),
by Chester Brown at Drawn & Quarterly's bookshop.

</li>
<li>
Got a private [Krita](%20http://www.krita.org) introduction by Boudewijn
and AnimTim. Looking forward to do beautiful work with it.

</li>
<li>
Ate bland cantine food at the Polytechnique and experienced two
extraordinary gourmet dinners by chef Beaver.

</li>
<li>
Stumbled upon the braveness of the
[OSP](http://ospublish.constantvzw.org/) with their [Sans Guilt
font](http://ospublish.constantvzw.org/foundry/sans-guilt/). Serious
design thinking and acting, lead by Femke Snelting, Ludivine Loiseau,
Pierre Marchand and John Haltiwanger.

</li>
<li>
Saw ginger present the eulogy of Open Colour Standard.

</li>
<li>
Managed to carry home 40 copies of issue 1.2 of [Libre Graphics
magazine](http://libregraphicsmag.com/). Dear subscribers, we'll send
you your copies this week!

</li>
<li>
Finally understood the reason to Aloe Blacc's song *I need a dollar*
when getting on 747, the shuttle bus to Montreal airport.

</li>
<li>
Got home full of energy. It indeed was a great week.

</li>
We shared some photos of this week
[here](http://www.flickr.com/photos/manufacturaind/sets/72157626712646692/).<!--:-->

