Title: Tools for a Read-Write World
Date: 2013-04-24 16:15
Author: manufactura
Category: Blogpost, Workshops
Slug: tools-for-a-read-write-world
Lang: en

<!--:en-->We have been busy at [Medialab
Prado](http://medialab-prado.es/) in Madrid for the last couple of
weeks, first participating in [Libre Graphics
Meeting](http://libregraphicsmeeting.org/2013/) (with two talks and a
workshop), and now we're integrating the
[Interactivos?'13](http://medialab-prado.es/article/future_tools)
advisors team, along with [ginger coons](http://adaptstudio.ca),
[Jennifer Dopazo](http://www.jenniferdopazo.com/graphic/), [Samer
Hassan](http://samer.hassan.name) and [Vicente Ruiz
Jurado](http://medialab-prado.es/person/vicente_jurado).

This edition of Interactivos? is dedicated to the theme of [Tools for a
Read-Write World](http://medialab-prado.es/article/future_tools), and 9
projects have been selected for an intensive development sprint at the
beautiful new Medialab Prado HQ.

For the first time in Interactivos?, there is going to be a printed
collection of the projects' diverse outcomes. We took the task of laying
out and designing the cover of this publication, while ginger coons,
Femke Snelting and Jennifer Dopazo take care of gathering material and
editing it.

Following the sprinting methodology of the workshop, we have spent a
full day brainstorming, looking for possible design cues and defining a
visual language for this publication, given the extremely tight
timeframe (3 and a half days from beginning until it's all printed!)

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/interactivos13-fanzine1-1024x768.jpg "interactivos13-fanzine1")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/interactivos13-fanzine1.jpg)

Working with
[plotters](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/2011/03/scheming-and-plotting/)
has given us new cues about how to use bézier strokes as expressive
design elements; drawing from technical diagrams and axonometric
projections, we've been going through a hectic iterative process, trying
out different layouts and positionings around the [I-beam
character](http://www.computerhope.com/jargon/i/ibeam.htm).<!--:--><!--:pt-->

Durante as duas últimas semanas temos estado a trabalhar no [Medialab
Prado](http://medialab-prado.es/), em Madrid. Viemos para participar na
[Libre Graphics Meeting](http://libregraphicsmeeting.org/2013/) (com
duas apresentações e um workshop) e para integrar a equipa de
orientadores do Interactivos?13, em conjunto com [ginger
coons](http://adaptstudio.ca), [Jennifer
Dopazo](http://www.jenniferdopazo.com/graphic/), [Samer
Hassan](http://samer.hassan.name) e [Vicente Ruiz
Jurado](http://medialab-prado.es/person/vicente_jurado).

Esta edição do Interactivos? é dedicada ao tema [Ferramentas para um
mundo legível e
editável](http://medialab-prado.es/article/future_tools). Foram
seleccionados 9 projectos para uma maratona intensiva de trabalho,
durante duas semanas, nas belíssimas instalações do Medialab Prado.

Pela primeira vez numa edição do Interactivos? vai existir uma curta
publicação impressa com documentação sobre o percurso e resultado dos
diferentes projectos. Nós tomámos em mãos o trabalho de paginação e
desenho da capa, enquanto ginger coons, Femke Snelting e Jennifer Dopazo
se encarregam de reunir e editar os materiais necessários.

Seguindo o ritmo de trabalho que aqui se respira, usámos o dia de ontem
para fazer brainstorm de ideias, desenvolver os conceitos aqui
discutidos e encontrar pistas para o design e identidade gráfica desta
publicação. Nos próximos dois dias e meio trataremos de paginar todo o
material, rever, imprimir, encadernar e lançar.

[![](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/interactivos13-fanzine1-1024x768.jpg "interactivos13-fanzine1")](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/interactivos13-fanzine1.jpg)

A nossa [investigação e experimentação com
plotters](http://blog.manufacturaindependente.org/2011/03/scheming-and-plotting/)
foi a base para a primeira imagem que criámos, para a chamada de
projectos deste Interactivos?. Seguindo esta linha continuamos com a
exploração da expressividade dos contornos (*strokes*) das curvas
bézier. Chegámos à imagem da capa a partir da iconografia dos diagramas
técnicos e axonometrias, num processo de iteração frenético, com
variações de composições e posicionamento à volta do carácter I
([I-beam](http://www.computerhope.com/jargon/i/ibeam.htm), ou cursor de
texto).

<!--:-->

