Title: ﻿From Stone to Spaceship, Collaborative type design
Summary: Type design workshop at Medialab Prado, Madrid
Date: 2012-11-06 12:44
Author: manufactura
Category: Post
Tags: type
Slug: from-stone-to-spaceship-collaborative-type-design
Lang: en

<small>This article was originally published in [Cuaderno
Medialab](http://www.eldiario.es/cuadernomedialab/piedra-nave-Diseno-colaborativo-tipografia_6_52554764.html)</small>

![Serrería Belga, Madrid]({filename}/media/IMG_3107-200x300.png)

The future home of [Medialab-Prado](http://medialab-prado.es/), Serrería Belga (Belgian Saw Mill),
has its facades decorated with beautiful typography. Taking on the
challenge set by Medialab-Prado to liberate these letters from their
stone prison and release them to the world, we hosted a three day
workshop in Madrid. The premise was to collaboratively design a font,
using a fully libre workflow and with no pre-requisites for
participation — everyone was invited to join in.

We were thrilled to receive this invitation from Medialab-Prado to come
to Madrid and work together in a font revival inspired by a building
with a rich historical background. The reception to the call was
impressive and two days later we closed it having enlisted a total of
thirty participants from different backgrounds and coming from different
cities in Spain.

The first challenge we faced was to come up with a method that allowed
collaboration to take place while, at the same time, creating and
maintaining a cohesive design style. Having Serreria’s wall lettering as
the starting point proved to be a very important aspect. It allowed us
to have a reference point we could start from and go back to whenever we
needed.

Looking at the building one of our first collective discoveries was that
the wall letterings didn't came from a pre-existing font. In the
compositions it is possible to identify different representations or
variations over the same character. Still there are some principles
behind the letter drawings that made it consistent in the overall.

[![]({filename}/media/170-end_day_one-300x168.jpg "170-end_day_one")]({filename}/media/170-end_day_one.jpg)
[![]({filename}/media/180-end_day_one-300x168.jpg "180-end_day_one")]({filename}/media/180-end_day_one.jpg)

The fact that the letterings were so rich and had so many shape
variations made it the perfect stage for the work taking place. It
allowed space for improvisation and interpretation (within a set of
constraints). There wasn't one clear direction for the font design but
many and we could pick from there freely.

The first day of the workshop went by without computer work. Pen and
paper were our medium of choice in a phase we wanted as free and
experimental as possible. The focus was to get the general feel of the
font and not the perfect letter shape.

From the wall letterings we identified to possible directions and
divided the large group of participants in two. We all moved to the
first drafting sessions, where each person would draw a small set of
letters. We would then gather and collectively look at the results,
selecting one of them; then, we would go through another iteration of
the process, this time with more letters, but sticking to the general
rules that were set by the first drawing that was selected. Again, we
all picked a satisfactory proposal among all of them, and the identity
of the typeface was then set.

[![]({filename}/media/020-sketching.jpg "020-sketching")]({filename}/media/020-sketching.jpg)

Now, the focus shifted from proposing alternative design directions to
working together in order to draw all the characters based on the
identity that we evolved in the previous steps. Using a manual version
control system (with sticky notes), everyone was supposed to work
together in order to draw the remaining characters from the alphabet,
numbers, and basic punctuation. The rudimentary version control system
helped understand the current status of our endeavour, as well as know
who was working on what (replacing shouts) and know who to ask for
pointers (e.g. someone drawing a B would want to discuss with whoever
drew the P.).

From time to time we would stop, look at the progress and realign the
general direction of the two typefaces taking shape. After a few hours
of work, drawing, comparing and re-sketching, we ended the day with
fairly complete character sets on paper.

On the second day it was time to turn our sketches digital, and for that
we used the best vector graphics editor we know — Inkscape. After an
introduction to vector drawing and a quick showcase of Inkscape’s
powerful features, we set out to re-draw all the sketches using points
and curves. The previous day drawings served as reference but we didn’t
scan them. They served to understand the letter’s structure but were
filled with inconsistencies we didn't want to reproduce in the digital
drawing.

[![]({filename}/media/150-manual_version_control.jpg "150-manual_version_control")]({filename}/media/150-manual_version_control.jpg)

In regular intervals we would print the letters and get together to
discuss them. Participants would propose changes, alternatives and
sometimes would even decide on making multiple variations of a
character. The environment was vibrant and lunch brakes became shorter
with the will to get back to work and accomplish as much as possible.
Extra characters were added to the initial set, some of them brought by
participants suggestions. One of them was the “ñ”, a characters widely
used in Spanish. Medialab-Prado’s technician contributed a beautiful @,
extending the font glyph coverage beyond what was initially planned.

The last day workshop day was reserved for Fontforge, the font editing
tool. It was when we began collecting all the glyphs and compiling them
in the final file. But a font is not made only out of glyphs, it is also
a collection of the relations between them. The spacing between
characters is an important part of type design and can be a very time
consuming one. In the field of libre fonts the task becomes easier as
you can use resources from one font and apply them to yours. Having this
in mind we went back for a script we wrote a year ago. It is called
Transpacing and what is does is that it picks the spacing tables from a
font and applies it to a different font. This made our work easier as we
quickly borrowed the spacings of similar fonts and applied them to our
own.

Once the fonts were finished we proceed to writing the copyright
notices, appending the Open Font License, creating the FONTLOG and
checking all appropriate boxes before exporting the final file. The font
was released on Open Font Library, an online repository of libre fonts,
and we all clicked the upload button together. From there anyone was
free to pick up the work, building upon it or take it in a different
direction.

[![]({filename}/media/330_poster.png "330_poster")]({filename}/media/330_poster.png)

The two fonts created were named Serreria, after the building that
inspired them. Serrería Sobria was based in the most conservative letter
shapes while Serrería Extravagante was based in more decorative shapes.
We celebrate their release and ended the workshop making beautiful type
specimens with them.

The fonts and documentation are available at
[manufacturaindependente.com/piedranave](http://manufacturaindependente.com/piedranave).  
Find [Serrería
Sobria](http://openfontlibrary.org/en/font/serreria-sobria) and
[Serrería
Extravagante](http://openfontlibrary.org/en/font/serreria-extravagante)
the fonts at Open Font Library.

<small>The photos in this posts are by
[kamatiko](http://www.kamatiko.net)</small>

